+++
title = "On proof of work, competitive industries, buying high and selling low."
date = "2018-07-22T17:58:21+08:00"
description = "On the usefulness of Social Proof of Work in ambiguous settings and its relationship with investing."
keywords = ["Proof of Work"]
categories = []
draft = "TRUE"
series = "Verbose Musings"
+++

When I arrived at Cambridge in 2011 I was immediately by approached by hoardes of corporate con men trying to sell me (a clueless teenager) a vision of what I should do after university. It starts fairly innoculously with free food. Since then I've learned that there is no such thing as a free meal unless your grandmother makes it. Law firms, investment banks and consultancies spend a large amount of money getting you (the clueless student) to go to career events. All you have to do is listen a bit to what it is they do (because you have no idea) and you'll get some booze and food in exchange.

You go there and listen to some strange corporate mumbojumbo, one of the many secular equivalents of sitting at Latin Mass. The company priest (HR person) goes on and on about the company values, followed by a talk by someone that clearly has more important things to do, but is talking to boozed up teenagers instead due to a sense of duty. In fact, calling these people at corporate events con men isn't fair. They weren't just talking the talk, they were walking it too. The vision they were selling is more or less what they have done with their lives (except that they paid less rent, had less student debt and other truths inconvenient to those who like to talk about [lazy millenials](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hER0Qp6QJNU)). They are true converts (more-or-less), or at least members of the same Church.

Of course nothing much is actually said at these events, so you discuss things with fellow students, and with some helpful prodding of the HR person (priest) you come to understand what is expected from you. First of all, you need to get a short internship (I think they called it a summer insight back then) in your first year, a summer internship in your second year, and hopefully by the end of your internship you should have a job offer which is conditional on having good exam results on your last year. Its all very nice, structured and familiar. The same way you have to jump through structured hoops in school (i.e. extracurricular activities, good grades, etc. etc.) to get into a good university, you have to jump through hoops to get into a Graduate Programme at one of these companies. All your friends are doing it too!

Then you hear that this isn't as easy as getting into good university (which is of course only easy in hindsight once you've done it). It is quite *competitive*. You have to read up on these companies and what they do. You have to pass tests. Practice interviews. All your friends are doing it, including that annoying idiot that always gets the best grades and does University level sports and just does everything perfectly and nothing wrong. You push yourself and have dozens of interviews in London (or some other big city) and write many cover letters and get advice from people on what to do. *Its hard to get, therefore it must be valuable.* Because it is valuable it becomes competitive (or is it the other way around?), so how do HR people select between dozens of young adults from good universities who dazzled by the promises of money and prestige? The only reliable way to get in is to expend significant effort in a recognisable way, that is to engage in social proof of work.

Proof of Work is a key element in Bitcoin (and many cryptocurrencies) and is one of Satoshi Nakamoto's genius ideas. The much simplified explanation of Proof of Work in Bitcoin is that you have a computer guess numbers until you get the cryptographically correct number. Mathematically it is easy to check that the number is right, but it is hard to come up with the right number. That is the key element of proof of work: it is easy to verify but hard to do, hence a single number shows how hard you've worked for it. If you get the right number, you get a reward in Bitcoins. Today there are millions of computers humming along, spending more electricity than small countries, mining bitcoin, all because of the demands of Proof of Work. According to the [Bitcoin Standard](https://www.amazon.com/Bitcoin-Standard-Decentralized-Alternative-Central/dp/1119473861) it is Proof of Work that makes bitcoin a good store of value. All the effort and competition in mining bitcoin adds value to it. Otherwise why would you do it if its not valuable?

The idea behind Proof of Work was not invented by Satoshi Nakamoto, in fact it was previously well known by teachers, University recruitment specialists and bosses everywhere throughout history. The problem is ubiquitous: you want to maximise a latent random variable named *Results*. But when evaluating the work of people working for you, it can be hard to evaluate *Results*. First, observed *Results* have strange distributions that are merely correlated with the amount of work put in. In some cases the relationship is linear: the more time you spend chopping wood, the more wood you will have chopped. In other cases, particularly with rare but highly profitable rewards, the relationship is far less linear. For example, pharmaceutical companies spend a fortune on research and development, but it is impossible to predict when a profitable drug will be found. Compared to chopping wood, research and development has a long iteration cycle. In areas with long iteration cycles, evaluating results within a short timeframe is foolish.

As a thought experiment, lets say you require surgery to remove a tumour. You have a choice between two surgeons, Abdullah (successful 60% of the time) and Billy (successful 50% of the time). Lets say you have to settle for one, but you do not know which one is best. If you observe both Abdullah and Billy perform 1000 surgeries, it will be fairly clear that Abdullah is better. However, if you can only observe a two surgeries every two years, you'll die before you can be certain which surgeon is best. Keep in mind, this is a simple example with static success percentages, but in the real world it is entirely possible that the success percentages change over time (Billy gets better, Abdullah's hands start shaking due to alcoholism) or circumstances (Abdullah may be operating on the easy patients with shoulder tumours, while Billy might be operating on harder brain tumours).

Pareto rule 80% of the useful work is done by 20% of the people. Why don't corporations just get rid of 80% of people? Well its really hard to tell them apart because proof-of-work & metrics are imperfect measures.


This is of course assuming that observed *Results* are unambiguous. In reality they are not. In the previous example we have an unambiguous result (died/ didn't die). Most often however we do not have such clear binary outcomes. How do you evaluate the performance of a teacher, a UI designer or a compliance lawyer? In the book the [Tyranny of metrics](https://press.princeton.edu/titles/11218.html) Jerry Muller argues that as soon as a metric becomes a performance target perverse incentives arise. This is well known to everyone that has worked in a place where you have KPIs "Key Performance Indicators". The entire industry of Search Engine Optimising is just about gaming Google metrics. If surgery success rate becomes the surgeons KPI, Billy will stop doing brain surgery and will start working on liposuction. CEOs, sales managers and accountants are short termist and juggle around numbers from Q4 to Q1 or vice versa because it'll improve their ability to hit target metrics. Nassim Nicolas Taleb is clear on the grownup equivalent of the "hot potato" game or musical chairs game, the [Bob Rubin Trade](http://www.isegoria.net/2017/05/the-bob-rubin-trade/) where you pass an ever increasing risk on to the next person in the hope that you're the one that ends up with the nice bonus and not the one that has the whole thing explode in their face. Hence, even though you want to maximise results, you often have to evaluate effort/work instead.

So how does one evaluate effort? People in positions of authority want to make sure people work as much as they can, but often it is difficult to actually check up on it. From a teachers point of view, sometimes it is easier to test whether you studied than to test your knowledge (which is unobservable). From a recruiters point of view, does an applicant actually want to work for the Equity Research desk at Credit Suisse, or did she just change a few words in the cover letter she sent to McKinsey? You could spend hours with your subordinates, observing their work, questioning your students, calling your candidates to ask a few questions. But there is a limited amount of time. You want to be able to check effort, but you want to be able to do so easily.

Hence Social Proof of Work is a perfectly valid way of assessing performance, as expended effort is positively correlated with results and is much easier to verify. In practice most evaluations of human performance are a combination of looking at heuristics for both results and effort expended.

Social proof of work are easily verifable signals that demonstrate expended effort and/or commitment. Examples are:
- Academic exams where the text contains a statement along the lines of "If x then y" and the question is: "if X then what?""
- Compliance training examinations (e.g. your colleague Johnny did something blatantly illegal. Do you tell your superiors or pretend it didn't happen?).
- All examinations about texts where the answer is clearly found in the text or context.
- Emails while at corporations sent early/late/on the weekend to show you are working early/late/on the weekend.
- Spending hours preparing a stupid powerpoint/spreadsheet/poster nobody will look at.
- Most multiple choice exams and rote memorisation exams.
- Going to university (for many people).
- Getting into a graduate programme at a law firm/consultancy/investment bank.
- The first few years at a law firm/consultancy/investment bank.
- Most of the theory part of driving exams.
- Buying flowers for your girlfriend.
- Gang tattoos on visible locations.

Social proof of work can be divided into two types: useful proof of work and useless proof of work. Useful proof of work is work that has a function other than to prove the invested effort. In the crypto space useful proof of work is somewhat of a holy grail: imagine if all the computers guessing numbers for bitcoin were searching for life signs from far away galaxies, simulating complex biochemical processes or helping compute AI equations. It turns out its quite hard to come up with a useful form of proof of work, so we're stuck with useless proof of work in the most part.  On the other hand, in humans useful proof of work does exist. For instance, a child learning multiplication tables by heart is proof of work (it can be easily verified the child has made the effort) but is also useful further on as the child will find them useful for further mathematical learning which in turn will lead to an engineering degree and working on an oil field in Kazahstan. The usefulness isn't binary, it is a very fuzzy continuum and often depends less on the task than on the individual doing it. A key question is, who is this expended effort useful for? Even useless tasks may be useful because of their difficulty: it may be useful to do them for no other reason than that it improves physical and mental endurance. This is why the stereotypical Hollywood military recruits at bootcamp carry logs on their heads.  

You can also divide proof of work into relative and absolute proof of work. Do you want to prove you've put an absolute amount of work in or an amount relative to others? In crypto you have relative rewards although there is an unambigous absolute measure of work (hashpower). In humans you can have both relative (if your exam is graded on a bell curve) or absolute proof of work (you pass the legal requirements for a drivers license). Competition is a critical for relative proof of work tasks. You want to prove not that you want something, but that you want it the most out of all the other people that want it. Hence, as an investment banking analyst you'll have to sacrifice sleep and health to prepare a powerpoint that does not really matter, to prove you want it the most. Not only that, you'll also have to go to a top university for a job that [can and used to be done](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liar%27s_Poker) by high school graduates. Doing the two years as an analyst at a grueling company with 100 hour weeks is the white collar equivalent of getting a gang tattoo on your face. It is a stupid sacrifice but it shows commitment in an easily verifiable way. In fact, there's an argument to be made that some of these examples are more [Proof of Stake](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proof-of-stake) than Proof of Work but for simplicity I'll ignore the distinction.

What about the rewards you get for the work? As always, rewards are probabilistic. Then, do you get a large reward on infrequent occasions, or is it a small but steady reward? In Bitcoin mining every ten minutes if you get the right number, you get rewarded for it with the block reward (you get some bitcoin, that is why it is called mining bitcoin). However, the more people are doing it the lower your chances are to get the right number. Hence you have mining pools, where people put their hashpower together, and thus have a greater chance get the block rewards. These are then split proportionally. Do you do solo mining or within a mining pool? Mining pools have costs though, for all that administration they take a percentage as a fee. In a way, large corporations are a combination of mining pools and pyramid schemes for collective proof of work. The longer you've been there the bigger percentage of the rewards you get.

In competitive relative proof of work scenarios there is an ever increasing amount of effort that needs to be expended in order to stay ahead. However, there is a limited amount of useful proof of work tasks per person. Of course, you can always find more useful work to do, but the usefulness of this work asymptotically decreases. Hence increased work requirements reduce the proportion of usefully expended effort.

Paradox: the less (proporttionally) useful work the less value you create, but the more work is put into something the more you expect rewards.

Hence a hot potato/ bob rubin trade situation. Hence many corporations build an efficient way of underpaying workers. Investment banking analysts are paid less than minimum wage at times. They are paid probablistically with the expected future rewards for their work.

Peter Thiel's from [0 to 1]. Competition is for suckers. You might miss your block reward. Paradoxically, the discipline may be a pre-emptive requeirement for being able to mine the big block reward.
